---
title: Using scRNAseq to investigate the use of mesenchymal stromal-cell derived extracellular vesicles in mitigating pathogenic signaling in human oligocortical spheroids
pi: Dr. Ella Zeldich, Anatomy & Neurobiology at Boston University School of Medicine
intern: Raghad Yamani
year: 2022
---

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released by nearly every cell type and are an important structure in inter-cellular
communication. Abnormal EV signaling is found in many conditions including ischemia, Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) and Down
Syndrome (DS). However, EVs from stem cells from healthy animals have recently emerged as a possible therapeutic
intervention to address a variety of neurological conditions. Mesenchymal stromal cell-derived (MSCs) extracellular
vesicles from the bone marrow of young healthy monkeys contain microRNAs and proteins and previous studies have shown
that MSC-EV treatment mitigates inflammation and oxidative stress, promotes myelination, and improves functional
recovery in a rhesus monkey model of cortical injury. EVs have also been shown to reduce AD pathology in mouse models by
promoting anti-inflammatory processes and slowing the progression of AD. While AD currently effects over 6 million
people in the United States, individuals with DS are disproportionately affected by early onset AD. Therefore,
investigating the efficacy of MSC-EVs as a potential therapeutic to mitigate AD like pathology in DS is critical.
Accordingly, the current study aims to explore the application of EVs on 3D human brain models of DS. We generated human
oligocortical spheroids (OLS) containing neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes allowing investigation of the effects
of the EVs in human, physiologically relevant conditions. We used DS-derived OLS generated from isogenic induced
pluripotent stem cell (iPSCs) lines to evaluate the efficacy of EV treatment in DS. Trisomic OLS display significantly
higher levels of amyloid beta (Aβ40 and Aβ42) depositions in both the soluble and insoluble fractions. Additionally,
trisomic OLS are consistently smaller than their euploid counterparts, and have elevated levels of cleaved-caspase 3 (
CC3) detection indicating more cell death. When treated with EVs, trisomic OLS demonstrated greater preserved cortical
volume, significantly decreased levels of Aβ40 and Aβ42 in both fractions, and significant reduction in cell death
compared to the untreated trisomic OLS. These results suggest that EVs alleviated the AD-related pathology in DS-derived
OLS. Evaluation of the markers of cortical layer neurons demonstrated significantly higher counts of neurons expressing
deep and superficial layer markers, suggesting that EVs contributed to greater preserved cortical volume of trisomic OLS
by promoting neurogenesis and alleviating trisomy-induced deficits.  

Our studies show for the first time the efficacy of MSC-EVs in mitigating DS and AD-related cellular phenotypes and
pathological depositions in human OLS. However, the molecular networks and signaling pathways mediating these events are
still unknown. Therefore, we attempted to perform more mechanistic studies using single cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq)
experiment. We have submitted 6 samples: 2 euploid samples, 2 trisomic samples not treated with EVs and 2 trisomic
samples treated with EVs for scRNA-seq using 10xGenomics platform. The OLS were successfully dissociated, and submitted
for a submitted for a single cell capture using 10X Genomics Chromium® single cell (v3 Chemistry) platform, the
libraries were prepared and sequences.

The project will include bioinformatics analysis of the data generated data through scRNA-seq. The project will
include but not limited to read alignment, dimension reduction and clustering, principal component analysis,
differential gene expression analyses using Seurat pipeline, potential pseudotime analysis.